Hurricane Katrina and The Supply Chain - Industry Market Trends

Woven into the innumerable tragedies that we as a nation face with every news report, Katrina not only tore apart many lives, but also the infrastructures that will helpsurvivors continue not only to live, but to rebuild.Schneider National, the 'largest full-load carrier' in the nation, has published an 'emergency edition of their newsletter, called Transit Times (Reader Marc Newman of WITPostal Logistics (http://www.witpostal.com/) alerted IMT to this informative newsletter, available here (http://www.schneider.com/katrinaUpdate.pdf) in PDF form. Thanks,Marc.).According to Schneider, major routes through Alabama, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi and Texas are closed, with the most severely damaged being the 100-mile routebetween New Orleans and Pascagoula, Mississippi. In New Orleans, the Pontchartrain Expressway (the downtown section of I-10) was full of water and the Twin Span, aportion of I-10 on the east side of New Orleans, has been completely destroyed, causing a break in I-10.'While Transit Times is geared to Schneider's customers and drivers, it clearly illustrates what may turn out to be the tip of the iceberg in terms of logistics and Katrina's longtermimpact on the supply chain. Beyond roads and highways, the rail system has been severely damaged, with tracks and rail beds torn apart or otherwise destabilized, andshipping containers strewn about like Matchbox toys. (See this page (http://209.157.64.200/focus/f-news/1475155/posts) for several telling photos of Union Pacific-relateddamage.)According to Lora Cecere of AMR Research (http://www.amrresearch.com/Content/View.asp?pmillid=18654), "Many of the basic assumptions of your supply chain—theavailability of supply, lead times, demand, and logistics—changed…when the storm hit the Gulf Coast. The full impact is unknown, but businesses should act now to shoreup their supply chains." Cecere continues, outlining that "The Gulf Coast is fraught with challenges now, as ocean, barge, and land freight are all compromised. Five majorports in the Mississippi River basin—with an annual volume of more than 450 million tons of cargo, more than 6.5 times the volume of Long Beach and 3 times the ports ofNew York and New Jersey—have halted operations." Barge freight disruption "will have a major impact on road and rail." Adding to Schneider's perspective, "Over-the-roadcarrier capacity in the Southeast will skyrocket. In the area around Katrina's devastation, trucks will have difficulty getting to destinations, and the added inefficiencies ofloading and unloading will result in a shortage of equipment and escalating prices."According to this article (http://www.miami.com/mld/miamiherald/news/weather/hurricanes/12538591.htm?source=rss&channel=miamiherald_hurricanes) in the MiamiHerald, '"The Mississippi River is the aorta of the American economy, and New Orleans is the access point to it," said Al DeLattre, a supply chain specialist with consultingfirm Accenture Ltd.' The food market will be hit especially hard, with abruptly and harshly disrupted shipments of fruit, vegetables, grain, sugar, soybeans, and coffee. Yes,the price of your coffee is already headed upward, along with gasoline. 'About a quarter of the entire U.S. stock of unprocessed coffee—211 million pounds' worth—is storedin New Orleans. More than half of the Folger's and Millstone brand coffees sold by Procter & Gamble are made at two plants in New Orleans,' according to the article.''There are varying degrees of pain, but I don't think there are going to be many sectors that are not going to be impacted,'' said John Silvia, chief economist of WachoviaCorp. "Every grain farmer, every truck driver, every commercial driver, every consumer will be feeling Katrina." Oh, add to the list imported steel, plywood, and natural rubber.Combined, the items described here will just be the beginning. Manpower and resources are scrambling in other cities to help not only take up the slack, but also create aplace for the New Orleans-targeted shipments to go. Looking at rubber, for instance, "… workers in North Carolina have been rushing to clear warehouses, making room fora ship scheduled to arrive on Tuesday from Southeast Asia." No doubt, such hurried adjustments are happening around the country.It's also interesting to see the supply chain companies getting some ink, such as in this article (http://www.eweek.com/article2/0,1895,1856215,00.asp). Sure, varioustechniques and technologies will help the Gulf Coast and the nation get through this. That's assuming, however, that there IS a supply chain. By definition, 'supply chain'implies a path and—in this singular instance—Katrina whipped through and casually severed portions of that path.I never really began to see, until Katrina, how the United States—a place most people here and around the world view as the only remaining 'superpower'—has become soinextricably dependent on the rest of the planet. Without disaster, these ties (with China, for example) have often connected to price or convenience (e.g., Wal-Mart). Withdisaster—not even imagining another hurricane or worse—could these ties determine our ability to survive? Imagine the implications.